## MCCC

Mid-Cities Commodore Club Post Office Box 1578

Bedford, Texas 76021

****************************************************

MARCH

MCCC NEWS

****************************************************

ISSUE 12

## BOARD MEETING

The MCCC Board of Directors met March 3rd at Hurst Recreation Center. President Diane Dews called the meeting to order. action on a reguest by TCJC South Campus become affiliated with the MCCO while a150 retaining status as an official on-campus group. The discussion centered on whether. or not this would restrict other members from attending the TCJC chapter meetings. The board will consider general policy regards to requests from schools for chapter affiliation.

David Glazener presented a petition for the formation of a Grand Prarie chapter and the board approved the request. Ken Widner is organizing the April club meeting and asks that anyone with ideas or reguests contact him immediately. The board is also considering the disbursment of funds to the chapters in excess of paying ordinary expenses.

Mike Cramer will begin action through his lawyer regarding the incorporation of the club 85 SOOn directories of the total membershio will. not: distributed to club members. If members desire to have a directory of their chapter. the chapter will be responsible for printing their OWn list. In another matter relating to privacy. the will not make directories available to non-members.

Our librarians are actively working improve their service to members. Ken Widner will be working with them to improve time AS well as a general error check of all dists. The board passed a motion to purchase several new disks from TPUG as well as their "Disk of the Month" for both VIC 20 and the 64.

## PRESIDENT'S COLUMN

Congratulations to all the new officers and group leaders of our chapters! Thanks for volunteering to participate in the leadership of the club.

Due to the efforts of our club officers and members, news of the MCCC is spreading. We have been approached by several other groups wishing to affiliate with, and, become chapters of the MCCC. In fact, we are welcoming a new chapter to the club this month. A group from Grand frarie petitioned to join the MCCC and was approved by the Board of Directors, Sat. March 3. The Grand Prarie chapter will have its first organizational meeting Sat, March 10, at 2 pm at the Grand Prarie Public Library. For information, call David Glazener (214) 642-3131.

The club library has become a matter of concern to me and the other officers. Although we have fine library now. I feel it needs to grow in order to keep pace with the increasing needs of our membership. The Board voted to purchase 5 new disks from TPUG, 4 for the C-64 and 1 for the VIC 20. The Board also elected to begin purchasing TPUG's "Disk of the Month" which includes both 64 and VIC programs. However, this step is only a beginning. We also need input from our members in the form of software contributions, as well revisions and improvements. of our existing library. The new chapter librarians are, excited and full of ideas for improvement but we should not expect them to do it alone. Please offer your help and understanding as they organize and upgrade the library.

Ken Widner: Vice-President and Activities Chairman. currently working the presentations for the April meeting. If you have an idea or presentation that you feel will be of interest to the members contact ken at 924-8948.

I'm looking forward to seeing everyone at the April meeting.

Diane Dews

r

## EDITORIAL

The Mid-Cities Commodore Club was formed as non-profit organization for the mutual benefit of the members. We were not organized to provide a captive audience for persons wishing to make a is to exchange Public Domain programs and profit from the members. Business at our meetings information, free of mercenary motivation.

We do invite local, reputable businesses to speak to us and we recognize their right to seek to do business with OUr members. However, these businesses are introduced as such and no secret is made regarding their motivation. Persons other than invited guests are asked not to solicit our members. To compound the. problem, the solicitation for profit. 'of unauthorized duplicates of copyrighted material is contrary to our constitution and totally inappropriate.

If someone solicits you in a manner you feel is wrong, please advise your chapter president or a member of the MCCC Board of Directors. We assure you we will investigate and do our best to see bhat no one imposes upon a fellow member.

*****

****************

It has come to the attention of the MCCC Arlington Chapter officers that the "stenat the t exchange of copyrighted material was attempted at the February meeting. Members are reminded that only public domain software should be distributed. The club will be forced to take action if this . issue should arise again.

Tony Alvarez, who was elected to the office of chapter Reporter at the February meeting. has been disqualified due to the fact that he is not a member of the club. Dana Taylor has assumed this position since he received second place in the election. Our thanks to Dana for assuming this position for circumstances.

## MARCH MEETINGS

The HEB Chapter will meet on March 17 at 1:30 PM at the Hurst Recreation Center on Mary Nick Eigsti from Byteworks will be presenting demonstration of new products for Commodore computers. Among these new products will be the Cardco Light Pen, the Cardco Numeric Keypad and the Cardco Tax Package. In addition.

include some of the new games and books currently on the market.

The ARLINGTON Chapter will meet on March at

9 am in the Auditorium of the Community Center.

The FORT WORTH Chapter will meet on March: 17 at 1:30 pm at the General Dynamics. Recreation Center. Room #3. The program will consist of demostration of sprite programs, primarily

Spritemaster, by Fuzzy Wiest.

The newly formed GRAND PRARIE Chapter will hold its first organizational meeting Saturday, March 10 at 2 pm at the Grand Frairie Fublic Library. The library is located at 901 Conover. Foir information, call David Glazener at (214) 642-3131.

## EVENING MEETING FOR FORT WORTH

An organizational meeting will be field. Monday, March 19 at 7pm. at the Precinct Line Garage in Ft. Worth for the purpose of forming evening chapter of the club. If this time would fit your schedule, you are cordially invited to attend. For information and directions call "Fuzzy: at 927-8301.

## NARROW. GUAGE LANGUAGES

## by JERRY D. FRAZEE

While the American computer industry has keeping wary eyes on developments in Japan, may be that a stronger threat is blowing in Western Europe, We are aggressively trying to maintain our share in the computer hardware market, but we are being left behind in the area of programming languages. In Denmark, Ireland. Netherlands. generally, Europe, computers are being loaded with languages that are more efficient, faster and more powerful those found in the Apples. PCs. and Commodores of the USA. What is more, the language is friendly and transportable.

While American microcomputers minicomputers are wired to handle Basic. the Western Europeans are standardizing on language called Comal. It is possible that in ten years most if not all. European small computers will speak a compatible form of Comal. Meanwhile, our computer manufacturers tend to discourage languages that are transportable from one brand: to another. A program written in Basic for the will not run on the Commodore and vice-versa. Basic is not a bad language for beginners and it does have the property of easy editing (it is friendly). But it is far from the best for home computers or any computer. Basic programs tend to be inefficiently written due to the nature of Basic.

Many of the best ideas on programming have come from Europe. The British gave u5 a pioneer in Turing. The Dutchman Dijkstra 1s credited with bringing sanity into programming by showing that well written (structured) programs are efficient and understandable. The Italians and the French have contributed to programming Comal comes to us from the Danes, especially Christensen. Christensen's modest school obtained a DG Nova

1200 from America. Borge loved the machine but he was too little schooled to cope with Basic. Together with a few college friends he created hybrid of the friendly Basic and the fast. powerful Pascal. He wanted a strong language that was easy to teach and easy to learn. He called it Comal (COmmon Algorithmic Language) and it has proven to be a winner. The Commodore company produced a version with Christensen and put it in the public domain. The fact that it is almost may account for its lack of hype popularity. Versions are available for the Apple and several European computers. A Comal standards committee meets annually to seek industry wide improvements. The popular Turtle Logo graphic commands have been added and it has become the approved language school use in European countries, Compared to the American's Cobol and Fortran, Comal wins in many working environments. Only Pascal is its match. Comal, however, provides aids to the novice user. (such as automatic psuedo-line numbers) that make it much easier to code.

Currently, an advanced model of Comal is available for the Commodore 64 from some user groups for ten to twenty dollars. The disk version allows switching back into Basic to quickly use old software.

Comal is probably the only language that has a chance to break the hold of the much less and slower Basic. Cobol and Fortran have their uses, but are not good general purpose languages. We still have a chance to stay Sticking with even the "new and will be similar. to staying with railroad tracks. improved" Basic narrow guage ourselves exporting computers and importing programmers.

ED. NOTE: Dr. Jerry Frazee is science writer and executive committee computer society. Reproduction of this article is with the author's permission. The C-64 version of Comal has recently been acquired and may be requested through the club librarians.

## SFEEDSCRIPT AND THE GEMINI 10X

## bv JACK HAGEMEYER

If you are using a Gemini 10X Printer-Tymac Connection Interface with your Speedscript Word Processor, you may have discovered that not all of the special features of the printer used. This is a result of the program defaulting to the "emulate" mode for non-Commodore printers. To gain full control of the printer, it must be put into the "transparent" mode. Fortunately Speedscript has a provision for this. Two changes must be made.

1. Each time you request a print, press the shift along with the Control-P. When the ntrol-p. pess prompt asks for a "device #", answer 4. It will then prompt for "secondary address". An answer of will put it into transparent mode and printing will begin immediately.
2. Using the format commands. place lowercase "a" at the beginning a the document to transform FETASCII to standard ASCII. Do this before any printing.

The format commands allow you to define up to 9 codes for controlling the printer. The first four are predefined but can be changed if desired. By embedding these codes in vour text. yOu can produce expanded or condensed type, italics, underline, add sub- and superscripts. etc.

Typical settings of the user-defined codes might be:

(1)=27

(7) = 14

(3) =15

(4)= 18

(5) =45

(6) = 1

(7) = 0

(8)=71

(9)=72

The following effects could then be produced in the printed copy:

- (2)

- (3) Condensed type

- (4)

- (1) (5) 16) Underline

- (1) (5) (7) Underline Off

(1) (8)

- (1) (9) Double-Strike Off

Elongated type

Fica type

Double Strike

In a similar manner these codes redefined to produce other effects. could be

## FROGGER ADVICE

The following article was submitted by Michael Lee Widner, age 7 of the Ft. WorthChapter.

Are you tired of having to use the fire button to advance your frog? I found that entering the numbers 1. 2. 3 and 4 when prompted for the up key. down key, etc., allows you to use the up position on your joystick. This works for Sierra Vision's Frogger game. Be sure that your joystick is plugged into Control Fort 2.

## BITS AND FIECES

Cold Start

VIC SYS 64802

(resets computer) 64
```basic
SYS 64738 or

SYS 58260
```
Character Color 64
```
POKE 646, n
```
in is a number from 1 to 15)

Lower case text

VIC/64 ```PRINT CHR$ (14)```

Upper case/Graphics
```
FRINT CHR$ (142)
```
These programmer's hints were reproduced from THE MONITOR, the newsletter of the Commodore User Group of Austin.

## CHAPTER NEWS

All three chapters met on Saturday. Feb. 19 to conduct their first business meetings and exchange software. The combined minutes of each chapter meeting follow.

All three chapters approved motion incorporate the club as a "not for profit" entity with ecoenses not to exceed $450.00. Members were also informed that we are taking bids regarding liability insurance for all three chapters as well as the club as a whole. All three chapters elected officers. (The list of newly elected officers appears elsewhere in this issue.)

All three chapters voted to continue the practice of having regular meetings on the 3rd Saturday of the month.

Reports were made that the current club membership is over 350 and the treasury balance stands at $3800,00.

All three chapters › question and answer exchange software. included the traditional period and dismissed to

********

****

**

## FORT WORTH CHAPTER OFFICERS

| Position | Name | Phone |
|----------|------|-------|
| PRESIDENT | Larry Wiest (Fuzzy) | 927-8301 |
| VICE-PRESIDENT | Mary Hagemeyer | 732-0982 |
| REPORTER | Scott Payne | 292-2106 |
| SECRETARY | Cory Scott | 551-5538 |
| LIBRARIANS | Jill & Gary Campbell | 297-4125 |
| C-64 LEADER | Ellen Triolett | 295-4957 |
| C-64 LEADER | David Wiley | 244-3700 |
| C-64 LEADER | Larry Magee | 246-0746 |
| C-64 LEADER | Lance Franklin | 738-8135 |
| C-64 LEADER | Bob Krause | 292-8639 |
| C-64 LEADER | Joe Ostrofol | 534-1990 |
| VIC 20 LEADER | Wes Hewet | 246-9166 |
| VIC 20 LEADER | Bill Aiken | 292-0287 |
| VIC 20 LEADER | Charlie Blair | 292-4190 |

## ARLINGTON CHAPTER OFFICERS

| Position | Name | Phone |
|----------|------|-------|
| PRESIDENT | Francine Wharton | 467-7559 |
| VICE-PRESIDENT | Clem Countess | 275-5072 |
| SECRETARY/TREASURER | Bill Raecke | 465-2014 |
| REPORTER | Dana Taylor | 457-9070 |
| LIBRARIAN | Roy & Judy King | 451-7610 |
| ASST. LIBRARIAN | Pete Link | 261-5328 |
| C-64 LEADER | Lyle DeVore | 641-1748 |
| C-64 LEADER | Gerry Peterson | 465-4216 |
| C-64 LEADER | Harold Williams | 483-0537 |

## MID-CITIES COMMODORE CLUB OFFICERS

| Position | Name | Phone |
|----------|------|-------|
| PRESIDENT | Diane Dews | 485-4747 |
| VICE-PRESIDENT | Ken Widner | 924-8948 |
| TREASURER | Bruce Nelson | 498-0899 |
| SECRETARY | Steve Stockdale | 571-9187 |
| CO-LIBRARIAN | Leonard Parker | 292-1090 |
| CO-LIBRARIAN | Jesse Carden | 838-9530 |
| EDITORS | Barbara & Michael Cramer | 284-3565 |
| EDUCATION CHAIRMAN | Joe Kent | 281-7506 |
| PAST PRESIDENT | Garry Wordelman | 281-7457 |

## HURST-EULESS-BEDFORD CHAPTER OFFICERS

| Position | Name | Phone |
|----------|------|-------|
| PRESIDENT | Roy Baker | 283-8324 |
| VICE-PRESIDENT | Gary Blocker | 838-6252 |
| TREASURER | Bruce Nelson | 498-0899 |
| SECRETARY/REPORTER | Brent Metts | 268-8374 |
| LIBRARIAN | Dan Branam | 283-3621 |
| ASST. LIBRARIAN | Roger Hoggard | 281-2608 |
| ASST. LIBRARIAN | Mike Swain | 498-4244 |
| VIC 20 LEADER | Gary Blocker | 838-6252 |
| C-64 LEADER | David Rye | 284-5672 |
| C-64 LEADER | Brian Foley | 498-6305 |
| C-64 LEADER | Dan Branam | 283-3621 |
| MODEM LEADER | Roger Hoggard | 281-2608 |

11

## METROPLEX BULLETIN BOARDS

Here is an up-dated Startext list of the bulletin boards available to computer owners in the Metroplex area. Using your modem. you can call the desired number and receive a description of services. George Crowley has contributed this list and is happy to anyone needing more information about their modem.

## METROPLEX COMPUTER BULLETIN BOARDS REVISED 1/13/84

### NEWEST ADDITIONS

| BBS Name | Phone | Hours/Notes |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| DFWCISUG SIG | 275-1467 | 24 hours (Compuserve Users Only) |
| ASTRO-FLYER | 467-3612 | 10 pm - 8 am Mon.-Sat. |
| TELECOMM III | 261-3315 | Nights after 5 pm |
| PRIVATE POST | 485-7220 | |
| FWPCRABBS | 473-4064 | 300/1200 |
| DIAL YOUR MATCH FORT WORTH | 457-7321 | 5 pm - 8 am |

### FORT WORTH BULLETIN BOARDS

| BBS Name | Phone | Hours/Notes |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| ASGARD | 498-1746 | 24 hours |
| ATARI ZONE II | 281-2406 | |
| GOOD NEWS | 483-1264 | |
| SOFTWARE TERMINAL | 244-4151 | |
| TEXAS CONNECTION | 283-3886 | |
| TRACK II | 244-4151 | |

### METRO BULLETIN BOARDS (METRO NUMBERS)

| BBS Name | Phone | Hours/Notes |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| COMPUTALK | 595-3195 | |
| DAL-ACE | 498-1751 | |
| TELECOM II | 265-8220 | |

### DALLAS BULLETIN BOARDS (AREA CODE 214)

| BBS Name | Phone | Hours/Notes |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| CHALKBOARD | 522-2529 | |
| DALTRUG | 289-1386 | |
| DESOTO IBM PC | 223-0983 (MODEM) / 223-6382 (VOICE) | 24 hours |
| DIAL A MATCH | 987-3547 | |
| ECLECTIC | 239-5842 | |
| ECLECTIC 2 | 239-5782 | |
| FANTASIA | 578-7041 | |
| HEATHKIT | 742-1380 | |
| MAGIC MANSION | 398-5672 | |
| PERCOM | 340-9226 | |
| PLANO (IBM PC) | 985-8889 | 24 hours |
| THE PULSE | 631-7747 | |
| RAVE BBS | 363-8503 | 8:30 pm - 9 am |
| RCFM | 931-8274 | |
| RPCC BBS | 996-6808 | |
| SOFTWARE EXCHANGE | 248-7757 | |
| TELEDUNJON III | 960-7654 | |
| TELEDUNJON IV | 241-3547 | |
| TEXAS TRADER II | 539-1231 | New Number |
| THETA LABS | 352-4147 | |
| WHITE PEGASUS | 680-9322 | |

## CLASSIFIED ADS

| Type | Description | Contact |
|------|-------------|---------|
| FOR SALE | Commodore 1525E Graphic Printer for VIC 20. Prints upper/lower case letters, graphic characters and custom designed graphics and charts. 30 CPS, 7x9 dot matrix; 80 column, tractor feed. Excellent condition. | Michael or Sandra at 281-7287 |
| WANTED | Articles for the newsletter. NO EXPERIENCE NECESSARY! Take a few minutes to jot down your thoughts, review software or draw cartoon. You provide the content and we'll put you in print! | |
| COURSE OFFERED | "Education and Training in the Use of Home Computers" will be offered by COMPUTER SERVICES. | Call 485-6979 for course information |
| WANTED | OKIDATA ROM Chip for Tymac Interface. | James 295-2946 |
| FOR SALE | PET 2001/B V4.0 Basic Computer; Dual Disk Drive, Printer and Business Software. | Ted 261-0641 or Nick 292-5598 |
| FOR SALE | VIC 20, Commodore 64, Datasette, VIC Modem and 801 Dot Matrix Printer. | John Schweiger at 274-0095 |

## HINTS AND TIPS

## SHIFT-RETURN

Have you ever tried editing a statement inside of quotes and had problems with cursor controls and insert/delete commands? Often the best thing to do is exit the line by pressing a shifted return. Shifted returns will not enter the current Basic line into memory: they merely put the cursor at the beginning of the next line. If you exit a statement with a shifted return. return to the line to edit it. When it is correct enter it into memory by pressing it When it is coral "return" usual.

## REM COMMANDS

Bet you thought REM statements were only for making remarks and that REM would not affect a Basic program, Well, that's not entirely true! you can put commands into REM statements. For example, if you want to prevent the listing of it that will cause the line to delete itself when

Tine, you can type REM with several deletes after ›listing.

## NOTICE :

Fellow M.C.C.C. members, this is in regard to the flyer mailed out on the Gemini 10x printer. I would like to appologize delay delivery to some of you, as I was informed that some flyers were received on Tuesday the 28th. The f1yers were mailed Thursday morning the and were expected to reach everyone by Saturday the 25th.

The $240.00 price was a limited offer from the distributor who would allow only 15 printers to be reserved without a deposit. Even though $240.00 was a super one-time price. I can purchase the printer for $275.00 at anytime. The price on "The Connection" by Tymac of $75.00 is their regular price. I'm also trying to find a good price on the bulk purchase of printer paper.

## MASTER PROGRAMMER: S CONTEST

Don"t forget our clubis first programmering contest which will become a quarterly event. FOr our premiere contest the subject will be GAMES and will be open to all members.

If you would like to have the title of Programmer " · this is the chance waiting for. The rules are simple. Master you have been

1. Your program must be original.
2. You must agree to make the program public domain.
3. 65 * 2, 984, (ou 68% ar cassette will be returned to you after the contest.)
3. You must be a member of the Mid-Cities Commodore Club.

Prizes will be awarded in two categories Youth l age 16 and younger) and Open (any member regardless of age.) The prizes wil! be an attractive engraved plaque AND the winner's choice of a T-shirt, a box of disks or a Commodore cap AND a mvstery bonus.

************

TO MCCC.

Please accept this original program as my entry in the first quarterly Master Programmer's Contest. I understand that it will become public domain and that the decision of the judges is final.

NAME:

PHONE:

SIGNATURE:

***:

***

***